This is Max from UNFR for the Midas
Touch Network. You know, words like
unprecedented and uncharted get thrown
around a lot when you cover the Trump
administration. And it almost feels a
little hack and a little clickbay to
keep using it, especially as the
socioeconomics guide. Not the most
exciting topic, right? So, I'm not
trying to compete with all of the
absolutely insane things that are going
on right now. So, please forgive the
framing of this one, but we are indeed
in uncharted territory with
unprecedented activity in the financial
markets. In the last week of October,
the plumbing of the financial system
broke and it's still leaking as of the
start of November. And if it gets worse,
we might be headed for an epic economic
meltdown. So, I'm going to break it all
down to compare it with past crises and
put it in context of the government
shutdown, the degrading economic data,
and the mounting US debt. This is the
ultimate peak under the hood that the
people who run this economy don't want
you to see. So, let's go.
[Music]
It's been a while since we've run
through macroeconomic numbers together.
So, let's start big picture before we
dig into the pipes that burst in the
financial markets to really explain the
severity of the situation. See, there's
a staggering disconnect between the
stock market and how the mainstream
media talks about the economy and what's
really going on behind the scenes at our
major financial institutions and below
the surface of the real economy. So big
picture, even though some data have been
delayed due to the government shutdown,
there are alternative data sources and
private releases that give us an idea of
where things stand at the moment. And
again, as we've said many times, the
stock market is not the economy. So it's
important to look past what's happening
with equities. For example, we know from
the Challenger Gray and Christmas
reporting that hiring for this holiday
season is expected to be at 2009 levels,
the literal peak of the global financial
crisis. We've seen mass layoff
announcements from IBM, Target, Amazon,
UPS, Meta, Google, Skyance, Paramount,
Intel. Baby boomers continue to exit the
job market at a rate of 10,000 per day.
So despite the lack of data at the
moment, the administration is able to
claim that the unemployment rate isn't
problematic, but it ignores how
entry-level jobs have been decimated by
our zero immigration and mass
deportation policy and baby boomers
leaving the workforce. So under these
circumstances, wages should be
increasing steadily due to decreasing
supply. Instead, wage growth among those
currently employed is stagnating or
declining. So, wage growth continues to
trend in the wrong direction, while
inflation, as you can see here, is still
above 3%, which is above the Fed's 2%
target. And this has many analysts
beginning to wonder if 3% is the new
normal. And maybe the Fed should just
adjust its mandate accordingly. And yet,
this has been celebrated by the Trump
administration because tariff inflation
hasn't shown up in the retail sector as
substantially as some thought it might,
but it did show up. Well, we should be
worried. The goods economy, uh, certain
portions of the goods economy are
collapsing right now. So, year-over-year
trucking volumes, this is really
predominance of freight that moves
across the United States is down 17%.
But when you look at the industrial
sectors, the folks are the the freight
that moves over the long haul, this is
energy, automotive, housing, and
manufacturing, we're down 30%
year-over-year, which is very great
financial crisis uh levels of concern.
It's really, if you think about where
we've seen inflation related to tariffs,
a lot of the tariff cost has been in
wholesale prices and wholesale goods and
and and so it's not showing up
necessarily in consumer prices, but it
is showing up in those wholesale prices.
And so those imports that companies are
getting in raw materials is really
taking a pretty, you know, a pretty big
hit. So that's where the tariff
inflation has been hiding in the raw
materials and the industrial sectors.
It's not making its way into goods,
which is actually a worse sign than we
originally anticipated. See, the
relative cost from tariffs isn't being
passed on to the consumers because they
can't afford to pass it along. They'd be
trying to get blood from a stone. In the
same way that crude oil can't push past
resistance levels right now. I mean, we
literally bombed Iran this year. We
sanctioned Russia and anyone selling oil
to them, and we're threatening to invade
Venezuela. These are all major pro
states. In any other climate, oil would
be through the roof under these
exogenous threats. Instead, nothing. Oil
is $60 and it can't break that range.
Translation is the consumer is dead.
So, how does this administration
reconcile this fact? by saying that the
whole point of their economic plan is
some temporary pain to move past a
consumer economy and toward a
manufacturing economy, essentially back
to the future. But manufacturing has
contracted since Trump took office.
Manufacturing jobs have declined and the
broad-based investments into renewable
energy and infrastructure under the
Biden administration have been shifted
to data centers to traditional fuels and
AI infrastructure designed to support a
new high-tech AI and datadriven economy,
not manufacturing. Oh, and by the way,
Wall Street and our government both
acknowledge that this will reduce the
demand for labor in the coming years.
Okay, so if we're supposed to be talking
about the plumbing of the financial
system, why start off with this
macroeconomic view? It's because the
economy is like a giant equation. It's
all about inputs and outputs. And
typically, we gauge the health of the
economy by business cycles and judging
the flows of these inputs and outputs.
And the biggest input is money. After
the global financial crisis and after
COVID, we sent trillions of dollars into
the system. Trillions. And some of it
went to work in the real economy, but
most of it went to cover for losses.
That was especially the case after the
GFC. But after COVID, the money went
everywhere fast. And that's the other
part of the equation. It's not just
about the money. It's about the velocity
of money. See, when money is flowing,
you can easily track the business
cycles. It's water flowing through the
pipes. So, when money stops flowing,
it's like sludge in the plumbing. And
eventually it backs up and it builds
pressure in the pipes and that's when
leaks occur. And if left unattended,
that's when leaks turn to bursts.
There's a very important market that's
overseen by the Federal Reserve called
the repo market. Now repo just stands
for repurchase and there are two sides
of it, the repo and the reverse repo,
which basically just indicates whether
financial firms are buying from it or
selling into it. Now, the names here can
cause a little bit of confusion, but
here's the best way to think about it.
Every night, trades settle out from the
day between buyers and sellers. And most
of the major financial institutions,
banking and non-bank firms, settle
through clearing houses, which means
it's a triparty transaction or directly
with one another, which is a bilateral
transaction. Now, sometimes there's so
much money changing hands that the
counterparty or the clearing house
that's putting up the cash will borrow
money to make sure that there's enough
to go around cuz remember these
investments and trades are highly highly
leveraged and every night there are
trillions of trillions of dollars worth
of transactions that are settling out.
So in order to create a buffer after the
global financial crisis, the Federal
Reserve created a new standing facility
called the standing repo facility.
Essentially a rainy day fund with
billions to sometimes hundreds of
billions of dollars in it at a set rate
of interest so that financial
institutions kind of have a safe haven
to access money. And as you can see in
this chart, this facility was filled
during the inflation crisis postcoid as
institutions were working out their
balance sheet issues and their
settlements. Today, the facility is
empty. In a moment, I'm going to show
you where it's all gone and where the
money is invested. But this is the first
important signal that we need to be
aware of. The rainy day fund is bone
dry. Now, let's talk about rates for a
minute because there are some
misconceptions about rates in the
marketplace and who sets them because
the narrative is always that the Fed
rate is a singular rate. It's the only
one that matters. And is the Fed going
to raise rates at the next meeting or
cut them? Did the market already price
that cut in? Did anyone descent? How did
the markets respond? What does it mean
for borrowers? And then the conversation
just kind of stops only to be revisited
the next time the FOMC gets together.
But rates tell a continuous and
relentless story about the nature of the
economy. For example, Treasury rates
tell us how other countries feel about
the way that we handle our business. So
you can see here that the Fed has been
cutting rates, right? That's the
horizontal blue line to where the high
end of the federal funds rate today is
4%.
Treasury rates, these are the
instruments that we use to finance our
debt, typically track pretty closely
with the federal funds rate. And what
we've seen in the past few weeks, is a
separation in the movement of yields.
Despite the Fed lowering the federal
funds rate, the yields on treasuries
have split across the board and moved
higher. In other words, the Fed and the
Treasury are officially on totally
different pages. The global marketplace
is hedging against the US and doesn't
believe that lowering rates will have a
stimulating effect on economic activity.
So, that's the really big picture on
rates. Now, there's other rates all
throughout the market. For example, at
the consumer level, uh credit cards and
auto loan rates tell us how the
capitalist markets think the consumer is
doing. Mortgage rates are a reflection
of consumer credit, health, and income.
But who sets these in reality?
There are two competing narratives here.
They're totally at odds with one another
when it comes to who controls the rates.
Because sometimes the government likes
to pretend that it's completely in
control of rates. At other times, it
doesn't take any credit. It backs away
and says, "Oh, that's the invisible hand
of the marketplace." Now, the truth is
somewhere in between this. The federal
funds rate, the one that everyone talks
about, is, believe it or not, more of a
suggestion than a fixed rate. Now, it
serves as a guide for sure, or more
precisely, a range. See, when the Fed
sets the federal funds rate, it's not a
fixed rate of borrowing. It's a range, a
very small range of a quarter of a
percent. This range, it's set for
overnight lending between banks. That's
it. It has nothing to do with you, with
your auto loan, your student debt
borrowing rate, or your mortgage. But
the theory holds that the baseline cost
of capital is set by this rate, right?
It's a benchmark for the market to set
expectations against. Now, let's get
even more specific about rates because
with this under your belt, you'll be
able to more easily spot where the leak
is sprung. So every day, banks, non-bank
financial institutions, and investors
track rate movements across a spectrum.
The federal funds rate that we just
talked about is only one of them, and it
doesn't move, but for the FOMC meetings.
But there's also something called the
secured overnight financing rate or
sofur, which is really important to the
story today. We've also got the reverse
repo award rate or RRP, interest on
reserve balances, the discount rate,
prime rate. So there are others but
these are really the big ones. Now the
federal funds rate is important. I don't
want to suggest that it's not. It's a
guide for the market. The prime rate is
based on the federal funds rate for
example. And this is extremely important
in commercial real estate and for
certain business lines of credit. So in
this way it's important in both
practical terms and for optics. And when
the actual rates in the banking system
fall within this range, that's when the
Fed comes in to say that it has complete
control of the market.
So now let's talk about sofur. And if
you grew up on Long Island like me, this
might be a little confusing because
that's how we pronounce this. Now for
normal people everywhere but Long
Island, sofur is the secured overnight
financing rate and it's the first sign
of leaky pipes. SOFUR is a composite of
market rates. It's not set by anyone.
It's where rates land, all of them kind
of put together during the overnight
trading. So when the sofur rate exceeds
the federal funds rate, it's sometimes
interpreted as a sign of stress in the
market, meaning that liquidity is tight.
So funding sources, the people that are
putting money into the system, are
looking for a premium. So if you're the
party that's lending money to others and
let's say you're not comfortable with
their collateralization, you'll ask for
a higher rate. That's just like real
life, right? So when this happens, large
financial firms that are eligible to
transact with the Federal Reserve look
to borrow from the Fed instead. So let's
look at Sofur this year. Sofur is almost
always within the Fed funds range. Now
remember that the Fed has lowered the
range twice in the past couple of
months. So the green line here is
showing the upper limit of that range. 4
and a/4% in September and 4% as of
October. These are the rate cuts that
you hear so much about. Now the yellow
line is that composite of market rates,
the sofur rate. So you can see on the
eve of the first rate cut, sofur briefly
exceeded the upper limit and then again
in midocctober and since the last week
of October and in the beginning of
November, it hasn't come back down. So
that means that the market is
consistently looking for a premium. And
here's where you can see the money being
supplied by the Fed as a backs stop.
Those tall blue lines represent the repo
agreements from the Fed. In other words,
certain lenders weren't happy with the
rates offered by the market. So they
sold securities, either mortgage back
securities or US Treasury notes to the
Fed in return for cash. It's another
thing that we'll touch on in a minute.
And I have to stress the point that this
is highly highly unusual. It happened
once in 2019 and set off a global panic
in bond and equity markets alike until
the Fed stepped in and pumped in tens of
billions of dollars into the system
overnight. So this means one of two
things. Financial institutions think
that their counterparties might not be
as healthy as they're saying or they
don't have it. So, this has led some to
note that the Fed has quote lost control
of interest rates in the market and that
we might be on the verge of a massive
liquidity crisis. Now, the real story
probably lies somewhere in between. But
the bottom line is that this facility
isn't supposed to be used this way and
it's rarely if ever used outside of
quarter end periods when banks are
looking to shore up their reserve
requirements ahead of reporting. So, if
money is leaking out of the system,
where's it all going? Well,
unfortunately, the United States
contracted with discount plumbers down
the block instead of calling up
professionals. Larry, Mo, and Curley
here are driving the policy bus at the
moment. So, we've got the Donald, Scott
Bessant, and Steven Myron. So, Donald
Trump decided to blow out our deficits
by maintaining spending levels while
cutting taxes on the wealthy and
corporations. So Scott Bessant, you
know, the guy who ran a hedge fund that
lost 90% of its value while the S&P
gained 167% over the same period. And
yes, I'm going to tell that story every
single time I mention his name because
he's such an arrogant ass who's in so
far over his head. That guy, Scott
Bessant, has to fund the government
through Treasury auctions, but he needs
to keep those rates as low as possible.
Which is why Steven Meerin, the other
guy in that photo, is on leave from the
White House and over at the Fed now
pushing the FOMC to lower rates because
they think they're still in control of
the market. But as we've shown, they
lost control of rates and that's why
they're going higher and higher. And by
the way, if you want to know who Steven
Myin is and why he's so dangerous, I
just did a whole expose on him on UNFR.
So check that out when you get a chance
because dollars to donuts, that guy is
going to be the next Fed chair. You
heard it here. But I digress. Here's
where the money is going. The yellow
line is that reverse repo market that we
talked about, that rainy day fund
plotted here against bank reserves in
red and the TGA or the Treasury General
Account in green. The TGA is the
government's checking account. That's
where we pay our bills out of. Bank
reserves are declining and the rainy day
fund is dry because the Fed and the
banks are being forced nicely to buy our
own treasuries to fill the country's
checking account. So, couple of fun
facts before I bring this home. When
Janet Yelen was the Fed chair, Scott
Besson, the guy who lost 90% of his
value in his hedge fund, criticized her
for rolling over long-term debt into
short-term instruments because they had
a lower interest rate. And now he's
doing the exact same thing to the
extreme. The other fun fact is that the
Federal Reserve quietly announced in the
footnotes of its last memorandum that
it's going to stop purchasing mortgage
back securities and only purchase
treasuries with the money that it has on
hand because they want to keep demand
for treasuries high and suppress the
yields. That's yield curve control. We
did it in the 50s and 60s and it was a
disaster. Now, if you made it this far,
you get a gold star because this is
confusing and also depressing. So, let
me briefly recap what's going on without
the charts and the graphs and the
jargon. All right, so let's go big
picture. Recently, a Harvard economist
named Jason Ferman estimated that if you
took out all of the spending into data
centers that fueled growth in the first
half of the year, that actual US GDP
would have only been.1%.
Yeah. Now, that money didn't go into
your pocket. Didn't even go to the
government. It just went to Wall Street.
That's what's pumping up equities. Wage
growth has been declining and
unemployment figures have only remained
stable because of a zero immigration and
mass deportation policy. Subprime
defaults are rising. So are
bankruptcies. High-profile private
credit bankruptcies revealed shaky
lending practices among all of those
counterparties in the financial markets
that we can't see. And that's led the
banks that we can see to increase rates
that they're charging these firms
despite the Fed's attempt to lower
interest rates by cutting the federal
funds rate. This is why people are
saying that the Fed has lost control of
rates. Inflation is stuck above 3%
despite slowing demand and slumping
consumer confidence to the point that
retailers have announced holiday hiring
will barely meet 2009 levels. In other
words, we're broke. The country is broke
and so are consumers. And the people who
have all the money are starting to hoard
it. The banks that have money are
investing in treasuries because the
deficits are increasing more than
projected. And the Treasury is retiring
old long-term debt with short-term debt
that's a little bit cheaper. But even
the short-term rates are starting to
rise and creep as well because people
are losing faith in us. So this is all
the equivalent of like rolling your
credit card debt to a zero interest
card. The debt doesn't go away. Tariffs
have brought the industrial economy to a
standstill. All to protect tax cuts for
corporations and the wealthy. 
